Yawning Portal: Anywhere

Inspired by the American Midwest, the South Londoners’ debut album is a drifting odyssey through ambient and downtempo trance that captures the feeling of meditative drives on sprawling backroads.

Billie Bugara
By Billie Bugara Reviewed December 19, 2025
By Billie Bugara
By

Genre: Electronic Label: Year0001 Release Date: 2025
Genre: Electronic
Genre:
Electronic
Label: Year0001
Label:
Year0001
Release Date: 2025
Release Date:
2025

For two South Londoners, Yawning Portal are oddly enchanted by the American Midwest. Their debut album Anywhere was originally conceived in and around Des Moines, Iowa: a land where AOR rock and country blast out of car speakers on drives across desolate Rust Belt towns and vast Corn Belt farmlands. Jess Mai Walker and Joseph Ware’s artistic and geographic origins seem like a far cry from this distinctly American form of vast nothingness. So why would they travel here to write an electronic album in response to, as they put it, “spending days driving around with no destination… just to get out of the house”? But as a young Ohioan born and raised just outside the Rubber City, these sentiments make perfect sense to me. A drifting odyssey through ambient and downtempo trance, Anywhere captures the romantic spirit of driving as meditation, using electronic music to conjure the affective release of being in constant motion, bringing new life to lifeless landscapes on the American backroads.
Midwesterners spend the most time behind the wheel out of all Americans, and so much of that time is spent going nowhere at all, and everywhere all the same. We trade the Heartland’s severe lack of “special places” for a sacred practice of drifting on wheels, a meditative state reserved to our region. When Walker’s powerfully delicate vocals whisper “let’s go out” on the refrain to “My City”—the album’s club-ready centerpiece—she’s ostensibly talking about speeding past a club that’s been abandoned for years rather than actually going out dancing, as she describes the distinctly Midwestern stimulations of “bleach and snow and gasoline” before calling “drive faster” as the track speeds to its finish line.
Anywhere evokes this meditative feeling in its sprawling mix of trance, downtempo, and ambient. Its organization as a continuous mix, where each track flows seamlessly into the next with no single genre taking precedence, gives it a distinctly modern feel, akin to the sprawling playlists us young Heartlanders used to soundtrack our drifts growing up. The pure ambience of “In Orion,” for example, bleeds into the chopped grooves of “In Iowa” before ramping up to complete downtempo trance glory on “My City.” The looping synth refrains and pounding emotion of trance-y cuts like “Magical Girl” blast as we speed down backroads; the metallic percussion and smooth loops of downtempo tracks like the Oli XL-assisted  “Silver Plated” evoke our coasts through dilapidated post-industrial towns; the submerging ambience of “Meridian Drift” and “Light to Light” reflect the endless gaze of those pitch-black night drives where we could only see the road in front of us.
No matter our speed or what genre is travelling alongside us, Anywhere lets the songs’ form and the weight of their instruments tell the story. The dense pop-leaning production of “Video” slowly unwinds towards its second half, turning what was a frantic drive into a sweet and hazy coast. Soft synth plucks appear in abstract bursts in wandering tracks like “Light to Light,” and as distinct arpeggiated refrains in the more arranged cuts like “Eternity Sunrise.” This dynamism elicits the romantic spirit and purpose behind driving through even the most barren landscapes, where the simultaneous acts of drifting, gazing, and thinking unearth profound emotions.
At just over an hour, the duo’s romanticized drive encounters some structural roadblocks. Anywhere’s first 20 minutes build up to a series of downtempo cuts, but first sprawl unevenly through a range of genres. The nearly eight-minute opener “Concord” could’ve done without the three-minute ambient regression after its powerful trance apex. “Pathfinder,” which bookends this build, also starts off strong—here, with a furious blast of spiraling plucks—but then falls asleep at the wheel at its midpoint, as a tired cast of squelching leads take over.
But these meandering moments are perhaps the price we all pay when we, as the sentimental lyrics on the twinkly closing track put it, “drive the long way home.” Anywhere is an exercise in the catharsis of motion, where the roads less travelled lead us to introspective untetheredness: dynamic emotions that require dynamic soundtracks. When a single track drifts from furious trance into abstract ambient, it captures those feelings setting in while still in motion, like the beautiful comedown from a meditative realization on the road. It’s “Midwestern Logic” to a tee: the journey will forever be more important than the destination.