Maureen: Queen

The Martinican artist helped popularize shatta, the dancehall offshoot born on her home island. She keeps the party going on her debut album, making a strong case to be the genre’s global ambassador.

Tomás Gauna
By Tomás Gauna Reviewed November 13, 2025
By Tomás Gauna
By

Genre: Pop/R&B Label: Because Music Release Date: 2025
Genre: Pop/R&B
Genre:
Pop/R&B
Label: Because Music
Label:
Because Music
Release Date: 2025
Release Date:
2025

Over the last few years, shatta—an offshoot of dancehall that originated in the 2010s—has taken over the Francophone world. The genre was born in the French overseas territory of Martinique, then became popular across the rest of the Caribbean and, in particular, in France itself. Mainstream Francophone singers and rappers have released songs influenced by the style and have collaborated with Martinican shatta artists, collecting platinum records and accolades along the way. Compared to other dancehall music, shatta tends to feature sparser, more minimal electronic beats, accompanied by hard-hitting basslines; it sounds tense, unpredictable, bordering on erratic. As explained by singer Maureen, the style lends itself to clear, no-holds-barred self-expression—and if anyone has a claim to understanding what shatta is capable of, it’s her.
In the past few years, Maureen has released a number of singles—including “Tic”, “Flex,” and “Bend Down”—that exemplify what makes shatta so special. Her raunchy, clever lyrics alternate between Martinican Creole, French, and Patois, and the tracks’ production retains the basic characteristics of contemporary dancehall but strips them to their rawest elements; sometimes, a great bassline that lodges in your brain can be more than enough. Those tracks helped cement her as an unstoppable force in the genre, opening the doors for her to collaborate with established artists and brands around the world. At this point, an album might feel like just a formality. But fortunately, her debut, Queen, proves Maureen is capable of keeping the party going for longer.
Opening track “Welcome to Shattaland” introduces the uninitiated to the world of shatta and everything that goes down in the parties and carnivals in Martinique where it originated: hedonism, beautiful people, and great music to get lost in all night long. Maureen exudes charm and tenacity while establishing her bona fides as a badass: “Mais chui la plus sauvage de toutes tes conquêtes” (“But I am the wildest of all your conquests”), she sings on the Konshens-featuring “Emoji Pêche.” She evokes sexiness in a playful, tongue-in-cheek way reminiscent of her peers in Jamaican dancehall like Spice or Shenseea and her contemporaries in shatta such as Shannon or Kryssy. But Maureen’s ability to build simple, memorable hooks—like on “Malalade”—that fit perfectly with the music’s own simplicity amplify her allure as a songwriter.
Even though most of the music on Queen is shatta to its core, the album does venture into other African and Afro-Caribbean styles. This includes bouyon, which also originated in the Antilles, in the country of Dominica: a genre marked by a fast tempo and vigorous production that has crossed over into the rest of the Francophone world, both the mainstream and the underground. Maureen has drawn from this style of music before, and she does so here most notably on “Mon C ne t’appartient pas.” She sounds breezy and comfortable over the song’s bubbly production, delivering some of her best singing and most memorable melodies. On the opposite end of the BPM spectrum, though, the slower beat on “Ensemble” sounds dangerously close to anodyne. The sweeter, almost-romantic vibe it’s going for lands much more successfully on the following track, the Maroon Riddimz duet “Thing for Yuh,” which has a pleasant call-and-response dynamic in its chorus.
Compared to Maureen’s uncompromising, edgier early singles, Queen oftentimes takes a more approachable, almost “pop” path as she works with international collaborators like Major Lazer’s Walshy Fire and Nigerian artist Yemi Alade and occasionally shows a softer side (in addition to the racy lyrics the genre is known for). The turn towards pop makes sense, given how much her profile has risen as of late: just this year, she’s featured on a COLORS studio session; went viral for “Money Pull Up,” her 2024 collaboration with French MC Blaiz Fayah; and has featured on a remix of Ghanaian American pop singer’s MOLIY’s hit “Shake It to the Max.” Still, Maureen isn’t sacrificing her witty lyrics or musical creativity on Queen; as shatta becomes more global, Queen makes a solid case for her to be its representative.