Yapping Portal: blue fifty-six

Under her latest alias, Angel Marcloid offers a beguiling collection of modular synth experiments that cycle between harsh textures and monochromatic expanses.

Maxie Younger
By Maxie Younger Reviewed February 11, 2026
By Maxie Younger
By

Genre: Experimental Label: Blue Tapes Release Date: 2026
Genre: Experimental
Genre:
Experimental
Label: Blue Tapes
Label:
Blue Tapes
Release Date: 2026
Release Date:
2026

Angel Marcloid is never one to let a mood pass her by. From the demented genre-slush of Fire-Toolz to the full-throated jazz fusion pastiche of Nonlocal Forecast, the Chicago-based artist’s prolific, slippery oeuvre is the extension of a life lived in service of the id and the endless pursuit of new intuitions. “I have no idea what it’s like to not know what music to make,” she once explained. “There are not enough years in my life to make all the music I want to make.” Yapping Portal, Marcloid’s newest alias, serves as a repository for her modular synth experiments. blue fifty-six, the project’s first label release, is a beguiling collection of noise suites that roam, shriek and stretch in search of an elusive sublimity.
Yapping Portal first materialized on Bandcamp in the latter half of 2025 with a series of improvisational releases: long-form, unpredictable modular jams bred from cascading chains of effects. Marcloid wanders patiently through these generative soundscapes like a documentarian in thrall to the process, recording snapshots of the music’s continuous ecosystem. blue fifty-six continues this journey; here, Marcloid exerts a loose but consistent curatorial grip as the album explores texture, peeling apart bright guitar tone into pointillist trickles, stacking layers of feedback into swaddling blankets of fuzz. Designed for headphone listening, blue fifty-six revels in the subtle manipulation of space, panning elements into a taut omnidirectional tapestry.
The album’s improvisatory nature deemphasizes longer phrases in favor of discrete moments; sounds rise sharply from the ether, linger briefly, then dissipate. “Into Volo Bog ! Sapphire Slug Parliament” punctures its web of spiraling noise with plangent plucks that form a lonely constellation among consuming static. “Filled Urine Blog ! Astral Gatorade Tribunal” opens on an irreverent bitcrushed sequencer loop whose careening notes suddenly freeze into icy, reedy drones and yawning chasms of reverb. The overall effect is akin to flipping through TV channels: a barrage of distinct aesthetics encountered stochastically, with the onus of deeper perusal thrust onto the viewer.
blue fifty-six twists from sharp palpitations into more monochromatic expanses as it wears on, locking the album into a repetitive dynamic between harsh and (relatively) soft sounds. The searing groans of “Spent Owl’s Mist ! Nocturnal Gregorian Facsimile,” for example, are immediately followed by twinkles of dial-tone frost on “Weeping Prowler Bypass ! Cries Of Lint,” which then collapse to screeching jackhammer static. While the interplay of these competing atmospheres can be compelling, the overall effect loses its power as the novelty wears off. By the album’s close, the lush, eerie pads of “Mosh Endearing Okay ! Glitter Gel Tesseract” offer welcome respite, anchoring the surrounding abstractions to an identifiable landmark. blue fifty-six situates itself in a paradoxically low-key plane: A capable companion to active and passive listening alike, it offers both spectacle and steady accompaniment. Against Marcloid’s sprawling catalog, it’s a slighter offering, but its rewards are still dazzling.