Natanya: Feline’s Return

The UK singer-producer combines nimble vocals and innovative arrangements with the compressed drama of Y2K dance pop; her ear for detail enlivens familiar sounds.

H.D. Angel
By H.D. Angel Reviewed January 13, 2026
By H.D. Angel
By

Genre: Pop/R&B Label: Human Re Sources Release Date: 2025
Genre: Pop/R&B
Genre:
Pop/R&B
Label: Human Re Sources
Label:
Human Re Sources
Release Date: 2025
Release Date:
2025

To call an artist like Natanya “genre-bending” is to miss the point; the genres have been bent already. What distinguishes the members of her cohort, raised on the everything-at-once fusion of the streaming era, is the purposefulness and personality they apply. The London singer-producer is part of a wave of upstart Gen Z acts from the UK bringing a versatile, internet-native sound close to the mainstream. Zooming out, she’s one of many young artists raised on a generation of approachable, conversational R&B (on one song, she’s crying about a lover while “Solana” is on her speaker) seeking the spectacle and songwriting discipline of older generations. Last year, she opened for both Ravyn Lenae and PinkPantheress on respective UK tours; she makes sense at the midpoint of these two, combining a nimble vocal approach and forward-thinking arrangements with a penchant for the compressed drama of Y2K dance-pop production. Feline’s Return, released as a pair of EPs in June and October, makes a case for Natanya as a resourceful young artist who can personalize a range of saturated sounds.
While Natanya wears her admiration for big-budget affairs like Janet Jackson’s All For You on her sleeve, her vocal production still maintains traces of the more languid bedroom soul popularized by the likes of Steve Lacy and monte booker. For Natanya, being a pop star is about inflection, arrangement, and attitude; even when she sings quietly, each choice she makes is magnified by the spotlight, and gets its oomph from how it’s situated alongside all the other layers. Sometimes, she’ll reach into a nasally Amy Winehouse vibrato, fitting her upbringing as a London jazz student. Other times, she’ll adopt a delivery closer to the colloquial American R&B of the ’90s (“truth” becomes “trewth”) or commanding Beyoncé verve. She shifts between vocal styles on a whim, clearly at home working inside these digital beats, and her flirtations rarely feel like obvious homage. There are some good lead melodies here, but Feline’s Return’s stickiest vocal moments are short and sweet—repeated backing phrases that play off the beat just right, riffs that leave trails of color in the mix, or animated MJ “ow!” ad-libs that invigorate you like cracking open an expensive brand of fizzy soda.
Natanya handles production on Feline’s Return alongside longtime collaborator Jkarri, who’s worked with PinkPantheress, Jim Legxacy, and Nia Archives. They try out a wide selection of beats, evoking the plucky, freeform rhythmic palette of 2000s R&B producers like Darkchild in spirit, if not necessarily in form. There’s booming dancehall on “Moviestar”; glittering Baltimore club on “Meeting You Once”; and the inspired choice, on “Dangerous,” to stage her sultry vocal against one of the staggered jerk beats that UK rappers love, capturing a moment of romantic confrontation that gets chopped and screwed on the bridge to heighten its tension. Some songs can feel overly reliant on appearing versatile, lacking a solid topline to focus them, and the atmospheric guitar-and-vocal arrangements on “Say the Word” and “Ur Fool” are somewhat anonymous. But it all goes down smoothly, as Natanya contrasts distorted beats and tricky drum patterns with an airy touch.
The best songs use Natanya’s dense web of ideas to reflect on opaque emotions that stubbornly refuse to be reduced to cliche. “Sofa Joy” is the record’s most obvious hit, a grounded, playing-guitar-on-the-couch Afrobeats number about domestic bliss. Natanya’s performance suggests the strain from two competing personalities underneath the relationship’s give-and-take. “Love is essential/It’s more than something special,” she sings, like she’s trying to argue her way out of sentiment. “Why’d we toy with that sofa joy?” Then she launches into an urgent, double-time flow that breaks up the song's sway, and finally underlines what she’s feeling directly: “You won’t give me what I need!”
Emboldened by the scope of her abilities as a singer and producer, Natanya shows serious potential as a songwriter with an original, poetic flair. She excels at the R&B scene-setting practiced by artists like Brent Faiyaz; panoramic production establishes a surreal outer world where anything might happen, while subversive, close-up vocals navigate more intimate inner experiences of ambiguity and distrust. From its title alone, the song “Jezebel” suggests many allusions: the Biblical figure representing temptation, the damaging trope of promiscuity levied against Black women, even the classic Sade song. Natanya complicates her old-school character sketch with cerebral shifts in perspective, affecting each of the voices that accompany a young woman’s drive for success and independence (demanding friends and parents, sexist expectations, her own willpower) in a lurching cascade of melodies. As she fends off her doubters, she sells unconventional turns of phrase with a diva’s conviction. When she tells herself to “take a shower in the water of your dreams,” you’re not sure whether she’s imagining a cleansing ritual or a plunge into the unknown, but either way, you understand the moment is pivotal. It’s a bittersweet, show-stopping song that only Natanya could assemble.